Let's first of all make sure we fully understand what's happening
and for this, I'll again use my buttons however just the first button here which I find with query
selector and then I can add an event listener to it as we did before.
So button add event listener, to a click again and then maybe execute this anonymous function where we
get the event object and where we then console log the event object.
Now I'll not just do it here on the button however, I'll also get access to this div here,
the only div I have on the entire screen, so therefore here I'll get my div with document query selector
for that div tag and also add an event listener on that and it doesn't matter if you registered that
event listener before or after the button event listener.
So here I will also log my event object
and now for us to be able to differentiate them,
here I'll also log clicked div
and then I'll copy that and down there, we can log clicked button.
OK
now with that set up, if I reload and I click on the button here, you see both execute button and then
div. So it executes from inside to outside because as I mentioned, by default all event listeners are
registered in the bubbling phase which means that capturing phase which runs first is totally ignored
but thereafter when the browser checks from inside to outside for that element on which the event occurred,
it first finds that on the element itself, we had a listener, therefore this runs first but then it checks
if there was a listener on the surrounding element, which in this case is the div and there we also had
a listener
so it executes that as well, then the browser by the way also goes onto the body and checks if there we
had a click listener but we don't
so therefore it doesn't execute any code for that because there is no code to execute but it goes
from the element from which the element occurs to all its ancestors and checks for event listeners on
them
and if they are there, it executes them,
this is what the browser does.
Now we could switch to the capturing phase by adding an extra third argument on the event listeners.
So here on the div for example, we could add a third parameter and if we set this to true, the default
is false and therefore doesn't need to be added
but if we set this to true, we're telling the browser this event listener should be part of the capturing
phase.
Now we don't have to switch all event listeners to the capturing phase,
we can just add this one here and now you will see that it will actually run before this button event
listener here runs.
So if I reload now and click this button, you'll see the div was clicked first or the event listener
ran first and then the button, because this listener here triggered in the capturing phase which comes
before the bubbling phase and since we registered this listener for the capturing phase, it executed
its code. So this can be useful if you want to switch the order and you have event listeners on the element
itself but also on some ancestor and for whatever reason, you want to execute the ancestor listener first,
that can be done by passing that extra third argument. Here I'll remove it because I don't want the behavior
here but it is something you could do. Now this entire process of having multiple listeners for the same
event because the event does not just trigger on the element itself but also on ancestors, that's called
propagation,
it means that the event propagates up, it bubbles up or in the capture phase, it kind of goes from outside
to inside but it basically means the event does not just occur on the element itself but also on all
ancestors or at least we can listen on all ancestors,
it occurred on this button but it's listenable on all ancestors because it propagates up,
it bubbles up,
it can be used anywhere above.
Now you can prevent this however.
Let's say we do have an event listener on the div here but we really only want to react to clicks on the
div here, not to clicks on a button in the div,
that could be a requirement you have in an app where you really want to make sure that button clicks don't
trigger the div click listener. To make sure that the click event for the button for example doesn't
propagate anymore,
you can call event.stopPropagation.
That's not the same as prevent default,
prevent default stops the default behavior
the browser might perform upon such an event, for a click event on a button, we have no default behavior
for a click event on a link for example,
we would have one, there the browser would leave the page and go to that links destination.
Stop propagation does nothing with the default behavior,
the default behavior still executes,
so for a form for example, the form would still be submitted but it stops the propagation which means
any other listeners for the same type of event on some ancestor elements will not trigger their event
listeners for this event.
So now you will see that clicked
div will not be printed to the console when we click on a button.
So if I reload and I click on a button, we only see the clicked button event listener,
I have to click somewhere else on the div to trigger that div click listener.
So that's what stop propagation does,
you also have stop immediate propagation,
that is useful if you have multiple event listeners on the same element,
so if we had more event listeners on the button, then after the first event listener, the other button
listeners,
so the other listeners on the same element also wouldn't run anymore. With just stop propagation, all
button event listeners would execute and only ancestor element clicked listeners would not execute.
That's the difference here and just as prevent default, this can be a very useful tool to make sure that
you can handle the events in exactly the way you want.
So you learned about stop propagation,
it's important to understand that not all events propagate.
Again, common sense is a good starting point to find out whether an event propagates or not,
for a click, it makes more sense, when we click something we could also want to listen to a click on a
parent element. For a hovering over something, it makes less sense.
If I add mouse enter here to my button and also
to my div and I reload,
you see now I entered the div,
so yes I'm still printing clicked div but it happens because of me hovering over it,
now I hover over the button and therefore you see indeed, I only trigger clicked button and not the div
as well,
that first output here was from when we reach the div for the first time. So mouse, mouse enter, mouse move events
typically don't propagate,
if you're not sure whether they propagate or not, whether they bubble up, you can always just print the
event object and have a look at it because you will find a bubbles property in there and as you see,
it says false here
which means this does not bubble up and hence you don't have to call stop propagation because it won't
propagate anyways and
there are a couple of events, drag events for example for drag and drop which don't propagate up because
that typically would lead to an undesired behavior.